JUDY WOODRUFF: On July the 7th,
President Trump sat down for
a highly anticipated meeting
with Russia's President
Vladimir Putin at the G20
summit in Hamburg, Germany.
But, last night, it was
disclosed that there
was a second lengthy
conversation later that
day between the two leaders,
one that the White House had
not spoken of at the time.
Nick Schifrin reports.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It was a
three-hour dinner party for the
world's most powerful people,
20 leaders, and their spouses.
On the menu, turbot fish
fillet, Friesian beef
cheeks, and chitchat.
President Trump worked the
room, and then took his seat.
Diagonally across
the table, first lady
Melania Trump and Russian
President Vladimir Putin.
The two talked to each
other with the help
of Putin's translator.
And as a dessert of raspberries
and cheese was served, Mr.
Trump walked over to Putin.
White House spokeswoman Sarah
Sanders today called their
talk brief and informal.
SARAH HUCKABEE SANDERS, Deputy
White House Press Secretary:
To try to create that there
was some sort of private
conversation in a room
with 40-plus people
seems a little bit
ridiculous.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Nick Burns is
a former U.S. ambassador to
NATO and veteran diplomat who
participated in dozens
of U.S.-Russia meetings.
NICHOLAS BURNS, Former U.S.
Undersecretary of State for
Political Affairs: This is not
a bad thing.
Vladimir Putin and Donald
Trump are the two most
powerful people in the world.
They barely know each other.
They'd only met once before
this G20 dinner, and it's really
important that they get to
know each other and develop
some capacity to have an
effective relationship.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Last night, Trump
blasted the media coverage,
tweeting: "Fake news story
of secret dinner
with Putin is sick."
The pro-Kremlin Russian
lawmaker Alexei Pushkov
used the exact same
language, describing reports
about a -- quote --
"secret dinner" as sick.
And, today, German Chancellor
Angela Merkel's spokesman called
these dinner conversations
normal.
STEFFEN SEIBERT, German
Government Spokesman
(through translator):
It is the fundamental
point of the G20 meeting
that, alongside working
meetings, there is room
and opportunity for
multiple informal contacts.
And that is certainly the
point of such a dinner.
NICK SCHIFRIN: But what
is unusual is that,
since there were no other
U.S. officials present,
and the translator was Putin's,
the U.S. officials who work on
Russia have no official notes.
NICHOLAS BURNS: The people down
the line cannot do their job if
they don't have an exact sense
of what our president said,
what the other guy said, and
how they can then pursue these
issues with the
Russian government.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The dinner talk
came on the same day as Trump
and Putin's only official
meeting.
That talk lasted
more than two hours.
The next day, having spoken
with Trump at least twice,
Putin praised Trump personally.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
As for personal relations, I
think that they have
been established.
I don't know how this will
sound, but I will say it how I
see it: The Trump on television
is very different
from the real person.
He's very direct.
He perceives his conversation
partner very well.
He's a fairly quick thinker.
NICK SCHIFRIN: It is that
kind of praise that many
here in Washington find
strange and concerning.
Multiple administration
officials tell the "NewsHour"
they have still not received a
report from the official
Trump-Putin meeting, let
alone the dinner conversation.
That is not business as usual.
NICHOLAS BURNS: President Trump
has put together, I think, the
weakest policy on Russia in 70
years.
It's why you have seen
so many people concerned
by this one conversation.
What did President Trump
say to President Putin?
People in our government need
to know the answers to those
questions, and we as citizens
need those answers as well.
NICK SCHIFRIN: A dinnertime
conversation might not
be out of the ordinary,
except the president's
2016 campaign is under
investigation for possibly
colluding with Russia.
And the man he was talking to
is accused by U.S. intelligence
of ordering the covert effort
to help Trump get elected.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Nick Schifrin in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Late today, the
Senate Judiciary Committee said
that Donald Trump Jr. and former
Trump campaign manager Paul
Manafort will testify next
Wednesday about their meeting
with a Russian
lawyer last summer.
The president's son-in-law,
Jared Kushner, goes before the
Senate Intelligence Committee
on Monday.